Good product managers learn lots of experiments by
exposing some part of the user base to a new feature or layout,
while leaving another part of the user base exposed to the original feature and layout.
By exposing some users to a new feature,
product managers can measure whether that feature had the desired effect on KPIs.
One type of experiment is an A/B test,
an A/B test is a way of seeing if
a single change has an effect compared to what is currently in place.
Here's how an A/B test works: First,
you decide what change you want to test.
For example, you might want to know if a red checkbox will be more
effective than your current blue checkbox at getting people to read your newsletter.
Then you decide which groups of users will see
the control and which group of users will see the test.
You want both groups to be similar so that you
know any change you measure will be the result of your experiment,
not because the people in the two groups are different types of people.
Once you have your groups,
you run the experiment,
you want the experiment to run long enough that enough people have seen it.
The more people see it,
or the bigger the change the experiment causes,
the more confident you can be that any change you see is because of your experiment.
Finally, you measure the results and see
if the experiment results in improved key performance indicators.
For example, were users who saw the red checkbox more likely to read your newsletter?
If so, you will likely want to roll out this change to all users.
If you decide the experiment didn't have the impact you want,
you know you need to try something else.
In addition to A/B tests,
product managers often run multivariate tests.
Multivariate tests follow the same steps of an A/B tests in deciding what to test,
making user groups, running an experiment, and measuring results.
However, multivariate tests test more than one change at once.
The difference between A/B tests and multivariate tests is whether
you are testing one experimental condition against a control condition,
or testing many experimental conditions against a control condition.
The multiple conditions a product manager might test take three main forms: First,
multivariate tests can test a range,
any variable that goes from a low number to a higher one.
For example, when deciding how much to charge for a product,
a product manager might show different prices ranging
from $50-100 to see
which phrase resulted in the greatest profit based on conversion rates.
Another type of multivariate test is when a product manager test
many totally different versions of a feature or user interface.
This might occur when there are very different visions about
what the future should look like or how a page might function.
For example, a product manager might have
three different versions of the learning page with different texts
and images and test those three learning pages
against the current learning page to see what converts better.
However, this all in nothing approach isn't very sophisticated,
so the most common type of multivariate testing seen in products is testing variations of
a design by only changing a few elements at a time
and comparing the result of all the different variations that can be made.
For example, a product manager might want to
test a red or blue button to promote newsletter sign-up,
but also might want to test the words hello or hi.
The product manager would then create four different options,
a page with a blue button and the word hello,
a page with a blue button and the word hi,
a page with a red button and the word hello,
and finally a page with a red button and the word hi.
Because the product manager had two things they wanted to test,
each with two variations,
the final number of test designs is two-by-two or four.
Let's look at a simple visual example of multivariate testing of designs.
Here, we see a learning page that currently has
a dark blue bar at the top and a bright blue bar on the side.
A product manager wants to know if an orange or black might be
better on the top and if yellow or green might be better on the side.
Each change could be tested on its own as an A/B test, but then,
as a product manager,
we lose visibility into how different elements interact and affect each other.
For example, perhaps the dark blue bar works better on
top than a black bar unless the sidebar is also yellow.
Because there are multiple elements users interact with,
those multiple elements may work better in
some combination even if they don't work best viewed on their own.
Note that in this test,
the number of designs that needs to be tested is two elements each with three variations,
which produces a total of nine designs,
including the control state.
As the number of elements and the number of variations increases,
the number of tests designs grows quickly.